Subject: Reprocessing pipeline - validated against the notebooks, two bugs fixed, one open question


Hi all,

Update on the FITS reprocessing work. Short version: the parallel pipeline is
about 4x faster than the notebook pipeline, it agrees with the notebooks
wherever the two are actually doing the same thing, I found and fixed two bugs
in it, and I turned up one open question about pixel scale that I think matters
more than any of the rest.


WHERE THINGS STAND

fits_reprocess_parallel.py has processed the full archive: 94 runs, ~503k
frames, about 46 hours wall time. I also wrote a diagnostic script
(compare_pipelines.py) that checks its output against the bmp_to_fits.ipynb ->
dot_movie-Copy3.ipynb pipeline we're treating as truth, classifies every fit
failure by cause, and compares wall times.


SPEED

Better than I expected. On postspie/postspiegenie, where I have timings for
both pipelines on the same data:

    notebook pipeline    210 min
    parallel pipeline     50 min      (4.2x faster)

The interesting part is where the time goes. In the notebook run the actual
curve fitting is under 2 minutes; the animation is 155 of the 210 minutes. The
speedup comes almost entirely from streaming frames to ffmpeg during the fit
instead of doing a second serial pass.

So matplotlib is still roughly 75% of the parallel runtime - we just overlap it
now instead of paying for it twice. If we want another big multiple, the movie
path is the target, not the fitting.


AGREEMENT WITH THE NOTEBOOK PIPELINE

28 runs have results from both pipelines:

    17  match to within 0.1% on all eight summary statistics
     2  agree to better than 0.25%
     3  differ because of the quality-cut mismatch below
     6  differ because of frames one side dropped and the other kept
     0  unexplained

That last line is the one I care about: I can now account for every
disagreement, and none of them points at the fitting itself being different.

Two causes, both worth a group decision:

1. We use different quality cuts. dot_movie-Copy3 filters FWHM < 500 px;
   fits_reprocess uses < 1000 px. 27 runs keep frames the notebook would have
   thrown out.

2. This matters more than the frame counts suggest, because both pipelines
   report position relative to the FIRST SURVIVING FRAME. If a cut removes
   frame 0, every position in the run shifts by a constant. postspiegenie
   differs by 28% in y position because of exactly one dropped frame.

I'd like us to agree on one FWHM cut, and I'd suggest baselining position on
the median frame rather than the first, so a single dropped frame can't move
everything. Both change published numbers, so I don't want to just pick.


FIT FAILURES

18,309 of 417,700 frames, 4.4%. The useful finding: curve_fit never failed to
converge. Not once. Every single "failure" is a fit that converged onto the
background instead of the dot, ran up against the width limit, and then got
rejected by the FWHM cut. So this is not a fitting-robustness problem - it's
frames where the dot isn't findable.

Worst runs:
    bridgetstatic   96%   effectively no usable data
    newsecondary    72%
    overnight       68%
    fansoff         55%
    longweekend     49%
    laserweekend    25%
    allmetal        17%

allmetal is the cleanest example and probably the best place to start: the X
fit is fine at 8-13 px while the Y fit pegs at the maximum allowed width, so
there's simply no findable dot in the Y profile. I haven't yet worked out why
for any of these.


TWO BUGS, BOTH FIXED

1. The pipeline was reading its own output. Image runs are found by globbing
   *.png in the run folder - which is also where the plots get written - so any
   second pass ingested its own three plot PNGs as extra "frames." 31 runs had
   picked these up. Harmless to the numbers, but it corrupted frame counts.

2. Output files were keyed on run name alone, so runs sharing a name
   overwrote each other. Ten names cover thirty runs - "morning5237" alone is
   six separate runs on six different dates, "minutely" is seven. Everything is
   now keyed on date + run name; duplicate keys in the combined summary went
   from 18 to zero. Nothing was lost - the per-run copies on the E: drive were
   never affected - but the combined summary had only ever seen the last run of
   each name.

I also made output locations consistent. dot_movie writes a run's plots and
summary next to the data folder rather than inside it; FITS runs already
matched that, but image runs were dropping outputs in among the .bmp files.
They now go one level up, which also structurally prevents bug 1 from
recurring. There's a --migrate-image-outputs sweep for the old layout; I've
already run it (240 files across 40 runs).


THE OPEN QUESTION - PIXEL SCALE

This is the one I'd most like input on, because I think it may affect
conclusions we've already drawn.

pixel_scales.csv is empty for all 76 runs, so everything falls back to a
hardcoded 0.15 arcsec/px - inherited from dot_movie-Copy3, which multiplies by
0.15 with no explanation I can find.

But the main camera data spans eight different image shapes, from 480x640 up
to 1944x2592:

    480x640    36 runs        1216x1936    2 runs
    1920x2560  16 runs        1944x2592    2 runs
    1024x1280   6 runs        1200x1600    1 run
    1080x1920   5 runs        960x1280     1 run

If those reflect binning or ROI changes on the same sensor, then the real
arcsec-per-pixel differs by up to a factor of four between runs, and every
arcsec value we've quoted is wrong for most of them - which would mean FWHM and
position in arcsec are not comparable across runs at all.

Does anyone know where 0.15 came from, and whether it was ever meant to apply
to more than one configuration? Unlike the FWHM cut, this isn't a matter of
preference - there's a right answer, and I'd rather find it before committing
another 46 hours of reprocessing.

Related: two runs tagged main_camera have exactly the dalsa_genie sensor shape
(1216x1936). Camera is currently inferred from whether the run name contains
"genie", so either those are mislabeled or they used different optics.


NEXT

  - Track down the pixel scale question above (my top priority)
  - Agree on one FWHM cut and one position baseline
  - Work out why the dot is unfindable in the seven bad runs, starting with
    allmetal
  - Re-run the archive once those are settled, so we only pay the 46 hours once
  - Look at replacing the matplotlib movie path, since it's most of the
    remaining runtime
  - Identify which runs have both a laser splotch and an LED dot. The
    peak-count data gets partway there but flags every Genie run, so it still
    needs an eyeball pass; bridgetstatic and longweekend are the clear
    candidates

One housekeeping item for the group: the repo has picked up about 1.8 GB of
tracked data files, mostly temperature logs, and the git history is around
370 MB because a growing log file got re-committed as it grew. It's causing
disk pressure on the temperature Pi. I can stop tracking new data easily
enough, but actually shrinking the history means rewriting it, which would
break everyone's existing clone. Worth five minutes on a call before I touch
anything.

Happy to walk through any of this.
